00_introduction
================================================================================

Introduce course & workbooks. Set up workbook environment. Write hello world
program in environment.

# 01a_basic_types_control_flow

Introduce basic types - boolean, numberm & string - and control flow - for,
while, if/then.  Write simple mad libs. Write HiLo. Introduce PyQB, add color &
positioning to HiLo.

# 01b_terminal

Introduce the terminal. Choose a color scheme. Introduce file system commands:
ls, cd, pwd, mkdir, touch, rm, mv, cp, cat, less, globs.

# 02_strings_arrays_functions

Introduce functions. Rewrite chapter 1 with functions. Write several clock
functions using a date library. Write functions to calculate statistics (min, 
median, mean, max, stddev) on an array of numbers. Write functions for a
calculator. Write a PyQB UI for a calculator.

# 03_source_control

Introduce git. Create source repositories for existing projects. Redo HiLO
development using source control. Create github accounts. Share projects to
github. Clone a partner's project, make a change, submit a Pull Request to the
partner.

# 04_intro_to_objects

Introduce objects as Structured Data. Lander game using functions & objects.
Extend objects as structures data to objects as classes & instances. Rewrite
lander game as classes. 

# 05_object_extension

Lander levels using extension. Rug Store using Rug objects & extension. Rug
store using Rug property composition.

# 06_unit_testing

Introduce the concept of testing. Formalize with a testing framework. Add unit
tests to rug store.

# 07_input_output

Formalize input and output as user feedback. Describe pipes of data. Write HiLo
"AI" Player. Write Lander AI player. Introduce reading from files. Read
presidents.csv from file. Write UI to search presidents file. Extend UI to edit
presidents file.

# 08_user_interfaces

Rewrite president's UI using tkinter.

# 09_drawing

Draw koch snowflake. Draw mandelbrot set. Draw turtle sprite. Implement basic
turtle library.

# 10_debugging

Formalize techniques of tracing and debugging. Debug using log statements. Learn
reading errors. Debug using debugger (breakpoint, step, watch, etc).

# 11_mvc_sprites

Write a sprite-based game. In book: Space Invaders, basic Frogger. Project:
advanced frogger, tetris, Pac-Man.

# 12_mvc_paint

Write a clone of Paint. Pick color. Set canvas size. 3-5 brushes (Pen, Pencil,
Text; Spray, stylus). Save canvas to file. Load file.

# 13_team_programming

As a team, write a board game. Tic-Tac-Toe, Checkers, Chess are all reasonable.
